UC Transfer Essays

Prompt: Please describe how you have prepared for your intended major, including your readiness to succeed in your upper-division courses once you enroll at the university.

While most of my friends in middle school were signing up for sports, I found enjoyment in math boot camps. My father, a computer programmer, noticed my appreciation for math and suggested to explore the world of programming, similarly satisfying in its problem-solving approach. One night, he taught me how to make the computer say "Hello World." Since then, math and programming became my two passions.

In my high school's Math and Programming Club, I made friends who were as keen on solving problems together and collaborating to improve each other's solutions as I was. My junior year, I partook in the American Math Competition-12 and scored in the 90th percentile. At Oakland Hacks, my team built a web application that made listening to music online a social experience, placing third in the competition. We also placed at other hackathons, such as HP Code Wars.

I've also had opportunities to teach these subjects to my peers. In high school, I became a TA for AP Computer Science and had the opportunity to lead lectures and work with students on improving their code. In college, I've continued to tutor peers in math and computer science courses.

Most recently, I've been fortunate to conduct academic research alongside my coursework. Working with Dr. Vazquez on DNA topology research, I'm applying mathematical and computational analysis on the probabilities of DNA adopting different knot structures in cells. I'm also leading a project in Dr. Syed's lab, a program that will revolutionize the way Islamic Hadith is understood by automating Hadith appraisal by parsing encrypted hadith files, storing them in databases and running social network algorithms. Both Dr. Vazquez and Dr. Syed have been influential mentors, constantly challenging me and giving me projects that have allowed me to apply my math and programming skills in real world academia.

Math and computer science have opened a world of opportunities. I've been preparing my whole life to make an impact in this field; I am confident that my classes, research, and professional experiences thus far have well-prepared me for success in my upper division courses.

Prompt: Every person has a creative side, and it can be expressed in many ways: problem solving, original and innovative thinking, and artistically, to name a few. Describe how you express your creative side.

I love music. During my depression, I found solace in listening to my favorite rock bands pour their hearts while singing their songs. It's defined a lot of who I am today: the length of my hair, the clothes I wear, and my overall perspective. I'm a walking mid-2000's emo song. When I was 15, I saved up all the money I had and bought a guitar, teaching myself solely through Youtube tutorials. Eventually, I found out that I love something more than playing guitar and that was writing music.

Writing was an outlet to express my feelings and learn about myself; it was simple. Simple is beautiful and beautiful is simple. Driving around, writing music and reflecting, it doesn't get simpler than that. An open road and a silent world gave me clarity and the thoughts inside my head a chance to be heard. Music became the conduit for my introspection.

I would keep my music private, writing them in my notebook so that I could always come back to them. Eventually, I mustered up the courage to share my songs. I believed in my poetic poise, my articulate finesse. I shared my words with my two closest friends, Tony and Horace. Tony played violin and Horace played piano. Inspired by our combined talents, we started a band. It was the first time in my life I was doing something that I loved, writing music and playing shows.

Music is the purest form of expression. When I wrote music, my heart became autonomous. When I played shows, my soul became transparent. Music also connected me to those who felt my words; it became a community. My band and I would tour Warped Tour, write music on the road in the night, and play them on the lawn the next day. I'll never forget the words of a girl who always watched me play, "Danny, hearing your songs helps me think that I'm not alone." My music has not only played the strings of my own heart, but of those around me, and that has made all the difference.

Prompt: Describe the most significant challenge you have faced and the steps you have taken to overcome this challenge. How has this challenge affected your academic achievement?

Growing up, being Muslim had always been part of my core. I found stability and guidance in practicing my faith. However, when I was in high school, this stability was shaken as I began to question my sexuality and experienced feelings that contradicted my faith. I began to question my beliefs and my identity. 

I spent hours wandering outside by the lake near my home, hoping for clarity to overcome me as I escaped the distractions of my day-to-day life. As the sky darkened, my thoughts illuminated my world. I desperately needed my core to be re-centered, yet I could not slow the thoughts that raced throughout my mind. Instead, I chased them vigorously, an exercise that exhausted and depleted me.

I needed answers that would help me reconcile my beliefs and my feeling. As my hunger for these ached me to my core, I turned to reading books about religion that might give me answers that would satiate me. However, every answer led to a new question, each more complex than the last. Every day, I would walk back to the lake with new books in an endless pursuit of knowledge.

While these were the most gut-wrenching and challenging days of my life, they have had a profoundly positive impact on who I am today. I have learned how to question and push the bounds of my curiosity and understanding. This approach has enriched me personally, helping me define my own values and beliefs unencumbered by tradition.

Further, it has enriched my academic pursuits immensely. Today as a college student, I am involved in several academic research projects for which I am defining questions and developing frameworks to answer them. In my classes, I not only dig beneath the surface of what is being taught to understand concepts and theories, I also find myself obsessing about their practical applications beyond the classroom. Whereas I once insisted on "correct" answers, I now relish in the creativity that arises from ambiguity. I am grateful for the struggle that has opened my mind to the beauty of learning.

Prompt: What have you done to make your school or your community a better place?

Since the start of the Syrian revolution, I would hear stories and see videos of my family and friends on the ground. I'd become overwhelmed with helplessness and feel desperate to find a way to ease the suffering. So I decided to take action, even if it was in a small way.

As founder and president of the Middle Eastern Club at my high school, I convinced my history teacher to create a series of lessons in order to better educate my classmates about the Syrian Revolution. Through the club, I organized multiple fundraisers. Partnering with SAMS and the Yaseen Foundation, I raised $2,000 to help provide food and shelter to refugee camps in Lebanon.

My senior year I ran for class Vice President. I was thrilled that my peers elected me to represent them and doubly-happy because I felt my perspective as a Syrian-American added a diverse voice to the council and would shine a light on the urgency of the conflict. This gave me the platform to organize a large-scale drive for supplies in which 300 students donated clothes, blankets, books, and toys.

Attending UC Davis, I continued on my endeavor to help the people in my community. In attempts to make my efforts large scale, I decided to run for Senator, steward of ASUCD's 14-million-dollar budget. As Senator, I've become a voice for the community, speaking to student government and writing spending bills to get money for Middle Eastern workshops, awareness events, and fundraising efforts. I've also been able to add to the collective consciousness and debate on Syria.

Day-by-day people die in Syria at the hands of injustice, but I feel empowered to affect change even if the actions are small. I hope to see my country well-equipped for its people to live in freedom and peace. I imagine a country that intertwines all the freedoms in America with the culture and values of Syria. I pray for a day that I am able to use my voice to add to the unified community there, as much as I've done so here.


Common App:

Prompt: Please provide a statement that addresses your reasons for transferring and the objectives you hope to achieve. You can type directly into the box, or you can paste text from another source.

My high school experience has led me to believe strongly that significant and meaningful growth can only be realized when one is challenged exceptionally. I had not always excelled academically, but in high school I sought to change this by joining a different social circle than I was used to. Finding myself in love with math and its interface with computer science, I joined both the math and programming clubs. I ended up surrounding myself with competitive yet collaborative peers who were in constant pursuit of knowledge. My peers and I pushed each other to new heights, taking each other to various math competitions and weekend hack-a-thons, a true “nerd” activity. By the end of high school, I achieved at levels that exceeded what I had thought was possible. This included a top three finish at Oakland Hacks and HP Code Wars, two competitive local programming competitions, and top 10% in the American-Math Competition-12. By my senior year, I felt ready for a college where I could pursue my passion.

Although I had hoped to continue the momentum I built in high school and attend a university whose curriculum and students challenged me even further, my plans were stunted when my parents divorced my senior year. My father, the breadwinner in our family, cut contact and financial ties with us, leaving my mother with two college tuitions and a six-year old to support. The only affordable choice that also allowed me to live close to home so I could support my family emotionally was UC Davis.
 
Despite this, I was determined to find at UC Davis an environment that would foster my growth. I took rigorous courses across disciplines and competed with myself to maintain a perfect 4.0 GPA. I sought out and received opportunities to do academic research, rare for an undergraduate student, working with Dr. Syed on applying computational analysis to hadith literature and Dr. Vazquez on DNA topology research. Both professors have become influential mentors, giving me projects with increasing complexity that require me to apply my math and programming skills to address real-world problems.
 
Beyond the academics, in my pursuit of personal growth, I have always tried new things even if they were at first uncomfortable. I joined a fraternity, even though I do not drink alcohol. My fraternity brothers embraced me and have become my extended family and support network. Having not been involved in Davis’ student government but being passionate about improving my community, I ran for and was elected senator of student government and steward of its $14-million-dollar budget. As a senator, I’ve tried to learn from my fellow students what matters to them in order to help create a progressive, inclusive community. I passed legislation pushing for more sexual assault prevention education, mental health initiatives, and representation of minorities in STEM. Additionally, I have become a voice for the Middle Eastern community on campus.
Reflecting on my college career so far, I realize that I am missing a set of collaborative and competitive peers. My experience in a large, state university is that it is harder to find students who share my thirst for knowledge. I have found that despite the diversity on campus there is a similarity of thought shaped by a shared California upbringing. To accelerate my personal and academic growth, I feel compelled to break away from the comfort and familiarity of home and contribute to a new environment with more academic rigor, robust extracurricular opportunities, and more diversity that will shape my perspective of the world.

I am seeking to transfer because I never want to stop transforming and growing. I hope to surround myself with a new learning culture where people of different temperaments, talents, and convictions come together for the central purpose of pursuing knowledge.

It is my hope that, just as it did in high school, a new circle will drive me to achieve at a level higher than I am currently capable.
